----Common Diseases and Epidemics
= Polio is caused polio virus through human contact with infected person ,cough or sneeze droplets, interaction with water that contains polio
or feces of infected person.
Two types of polio:
Non paralytic Polio: Called Abortive poliomyelitis. Doesnt cause paralysis.Symptoms range from headache,Fever, Muscle Pain,Feeling Tired.
It eventually discipates in a period of 20 days
Paralytic Polio: Causes permanent paralysis. Goes to the spine and starts replicating the motor neuron and killing normal cells in the spinalcord. Un-treatble if a person
is infected.No cure.
Further catogeries:
Spinal Polio Causes paralysis in arms legs and abdomnal muscles.
Bulbar polio Causes loss of sight hearing and taste
Bulbarspinal causes both

Vaccination: IPV(Inactivated Polio Virus).Inject unactivated polio virus in the patient for him to develop immunity .This is done periodically until the child reaches the age of 5.

OPV: Oral polio Vaccine: Inject weakened polio virus in individuals for immune system to develop immunity against it.It can revert to Major Polio
that might cause paralysis.

=Diarrhea is a condition when an individual has loose or watery stools.This happens when there is a reduction in absorption of fluids from the
food in the intestines.it could be caused by multiple factors such as :
Intestinal disease
Skin Cancer
Contaminated Food and water
Eating food that might cause stomach disorder
Alcohol consumption

Prevention:
Clean Drinking water
Taking good care of personal hygiene
Washing hands before Eating
Eating Clean food

= Malaria is caused by a parasite known as plasmododium(micro-organism) available in the a Female mosquitos intestines.It attracts blood cells in the liver which
causes them to rupture and it further spreads to the whole body through the blood stream.It is also know as roman disease because it was so prevalent
in the roman empire.
Causes:
Mosquito Bite
Transfusion
Infection from syringes containing the microorganism

Prevention:
Mosquito Nets
Insect repellents
Infected Mother to child
Taking Antimalarial Medication if infected

= Dengue Vs Malaria
Dengue is a tropical disease
Malaria is a blood Disease
Dengue can only be spread through mosquito bite.
No vaccination for dengue or Malaria


= Hepatitis is a Liver inflammatory Disease that disturbs numerous core functions such bile production,Enzyme Activation, Protein Synthesis and Excretion.

Hepatitis A .Can be spread through close contact.Infected food or water sources.Symptoms include vomiting, nausea, fever, severe abdominal pain .Caused by Hepititis A virus
Vaccinate of Hepitis A virus is used for curing it.
Hepatitis B. Caused by Hepatitis B virus.
Hepatitis C. Caused by Hepatitis C virus
Hepatitis D. Caused by Hepatitis D virus
Hepatitis E. Caused by Hepatitis E virus

= HIV . Human Immunodeficieny Virus. HIV demolishes White Blood Cells.Specifically T-Cells.It leads to AIDS( Acquired Immunodeficieny syndrome).Human immune ssystem fails causing body to recover from
even minor injuries or disease very difficult.HIV leads to AIDS
HIV cant kill on its own
AIDS is Fatal on its own.

Infection can occur through
Blood contact, Multiple Sexual Partner s having HIV, Vaginal Fluids.

=Atmosphere: Atmosphere is a layer of protective gases above the Earths surface which prevents escape of Gases present in it and also
heat that is reaching Earth from the Sun. Atmosphere also filters out Ultra Voilet rays through Ozone that protects all life on the planet.
Layers of Atmosphere:

Exosphere: The last line of Atmosphere between Earth and space.There is no particular boundary where the Space starts.Earths gases gradually
leak into the space through this layer.

Thermosphere: Thermosphere lies above thermospere.Temperature increases as you ascent in the Mesosphere.This is because of the Ultravoilet
rays absorption from the sun. Aurora ,Northern Light occur in the Thermosphere.

Mesosphere: Mesosphere lies above the stratosphere.In Mesosphere temperature decreases the higher you go up.Satellites are present in the
Mesosphere.It lies at around 85 kilometer above the earths surface. Meteors burn in this layer.

Stratosphere: Stratosphere lies above troposphere.Ozone layer is Present in this layer.It reaches the height of upto 50 kilometers.Temperature rises as you move up in the stratosphere.
Aeroplanes often fly in the lower stratosphere because of low turbulence in this region.

Troposphere: Troposphere starts from earths surface and reachers upto 10 kilometers.Lower region of troposphere is called lower troposphere
while higher region of troposphere is called tropopause.75 percent of the air is present in troposphere.
99 percents of Earths water and moisture is present in Troposphere thats why you see condensed clouds in the troposphere.Temperature and
pressure decreases as you move up in troposphere.

Ionosphere

The ionosphere isn’t a distinct layer unlike other layers in the atmosphere. The ionosphere is a series of regions in parts of the
mesosphere and thermosphere where high-energy radiation from the Sun has knocked electrons loose from their parent atoms and molecule

= Lithosphere: Lithosphere consists of the earths outmost solid layer called crust and upper mantle.Which behaves in a elastic manner moving and
changing on a scale of thousands of years.It is the rigid outermost layer of the earth.Lithosphere is composed of sedimentary rocks
on top,granite and metamorphic rocks in the middle  and basaltic rock in the bottom.

It also consists of several large tectonic plates which move at about 10cm per year.

There are 2 types of it:
Oceanic Crust in the ocean basin
Continental Crust

=Types of Rocks:
Igneous rocks: They are formed through cooling of lava and magma beneath the earth or above the surface.
Intrusive igneous rocks: They are formed through cooling under the surface of the earth forming large crystals.
Extrusive igneous rocks: These are formed cooling on the surface of the Earth creating small cystaline structures.

MetaMorphic Rocks: These are formed by melting of other types of rocks under intense pressure and temperature.
Foilated  Metamorpic Rocks: Their distinct feature is appearance of layer of in their outlook.
Non Foilated : These show no layers on their surface.

Sedimentary: Sedimantary rocks are formed by accumulation of different types of debris like Plant matter, aninmal Bones,sand etc.
Organic Sedimentary: Formed by accumulation of plant and animal material.
Chemical: Formed from dissolved material containing elements such as iron orc and limestone .
clastic Sedimantary: Formed from weather debris like sand,water etc.

=Plate tectonic is a theory that Earths crust is divided into multiple hard shelled plates above the mantle.These plates move apart and collide
to form and break continents.Tectonic plates are present in the Lithosphere.
They cause earthquakes,Volcanic Eruptions,Mountain Formation,Continent Formation.


=Types of Atmospheric Pollution
Pollution: It is releasing harmful substanceor energy in the atmosphere that is detrimental to it.Such as poisonous gases,Loud Noises
Water Pollution: Caused when harmful substance is released in Rivers,Lakes and oceans.
Causes Oil spill,Human and animal Waster,Industrial Waster,
Dumping Nucluear waster inside the ocean.
Effects: LOSS of Marine Life, Detrimental Effect on corals and reefs,Destruction of Marine flora.

Soil Pollution:Release of Harmful Substance on the soil.Caused by Oil Spill, Radioactive waste,Industrial Waste.
Effects: Degradation of Soil Quality, Sterilization of Soil, Destruction of Plants, Death of animals,Soil Erosion,Land sliding

Noise Pollution:Release of Excessuve sound in the atmosphere is called Noise pollution.
Causes by Car horns,Construction machines, Rocket Testing, Dynamites and Bomb explotion
Effects: loss of hearing, Hypertension,Adverse Effect on animal and marine life like in the case of Whales which communicate over large distances
Air Pollution:Air pollution is release of harmful substance in the air.Causes Poisnous gases,Radio Active particles, Chorofloro carbons.
Effects: Skin Diseases, Asthema, Cancer,Ozone Depletion.

=Population Planning: Population planning is a method of controlling or inhibiting over growth of population in a specific region and Time.
Contraceptive is the most commonly and widely used method for this population planning.Countries like china have also taken steps on a nation
level such as one-child policy for population planning .

= Solid Waste Management : Its refers to Collection, Treating and disposing of Solid waste material. Solid waste material comes from sources
such as :
Agricultural Waste
Medical Waste
Industrial Waste
Human waste

Solid waste can be furthur divided in 3 more catogeries:
BioDegradable waste
Hazadous Waste
Recyclable waste


=Green House Effect: GreenHouse effects refers to the phenonmenon in which greenhouses gases absorb the energy coming from the sun on the surface
of the Earth and prevent it from escaping, this increasing the temperature of the whole planet.
These Green house gases are:
Water Vapour
Ozone
Carbon Dioxide
Methane

Causes of Green House Effect:
Melting of Glaciers
Rising Water Levels
Changing Precipitation Behaviour(Rain)
Floods
Expansion of Deserts
Global Warming is a consequence of GreenHouse Effect.


=Ozone Depletion: Ozone Lies in the stratosphere.Its plays an important role in protecting life on Earth by absorbing harmful Ultra Voilet rays
that are coming from the sun. Ozone Depletion is happening because of Chloroflourocarbons that go in the atmosphere and react with Ozone molecules
thus creating holes in this layer.

=Acid Rain: Acid rains occurs when Nitrous Oxide and Sulphur Oxide escape in the atmosphere and react with water molecules in the air.
Acid rain is directly harmless to humans but it damages plants and animals which can indirectly effect humans negatively.
Acid rain can also cause weakening of concrete structures along with degradation of Paint.

= Montreal Protocol: its refers to 1985 vienna convention for curbing of Ozone Depletion Substances.Its has been signed by 196 countries of
the united nations. Its states a gradual timeline for decreasing usage of ODSs for both developing and developed nations.They both have
equal but different responsibilities.Financial and technical assistance is also deemed fpr developing nations which release less 0.3kg of ODSs
per year.

=Kyoto Protocol: It is a international Treaty to reduce emission of green house gases in the atmosphere.There are 6 specified gases in this
protocol which are: Carbon Dioxide, Methane, Nitrous oxide, Petraflourocarbon,hydroflourocarbon,Sulphur Hexaflouride.
it was adopted in 11 december 1997.84 countries are its signatories.It is legally binding .192 are part of it.
Canada Usa, Andorra,South Sudan are not part of it.

=Remote Sensing: It is Analyzing and studying objects from a vast range without physical contanct.
Process: Electromagnetic waves from the Sun strikes the earths surface. Satellites capture this data.Send it to Data Analysis Houses.
Data is interpreted their.Used in Geography,Geology,Hydrology,Glaciology.

GIS(Geographic Information System) is a compute based tool used for collecting and analyzing data on Earth.

=Antioxidation and Preservatives: Both prolong the shelf life of foods.
Antioxidants inhibit chemical change through stopping oxidative rancidity in foods.
Preservatives stop growth of food deteriorating bacteria.

=Information technology (IT) is the use of computers to store, retrieve, transmit, and manipulate data or information.
Networking standards define the rules for data communications that are needed for interoperability of networking technologies and processes.
Network connects thousands of PC, at one-time while the Internet connects millions of computers at one time.
In a network, one entity has administrative rights to manage the network whereas on the Internet, no entity controls the system.
Network objective is to exchange data and collaborates with peers whereas the main Internet objective is to get the knowledge and communicate over the Internet.
Wireless Communication is a method of transmitting information from one point to other, without using any connection like wires, cables or any physical medium.

Wireless Communication systems can be again classified as Simplex, Half Duplex and Full Duplex. Simplex communication is one way communication. An example is Radio broadcast system.

Half Duplex is two way communication but not simultaneous one. An example is walkie – talkie (civilian band radio).
Full Duplex is also two way communication and it is a simultaneous one. Best example for full duplex is mobile phones.

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

=

